once upon a time we lived in an economy
of financial growth and prosperity this
was called the Great Moderation the
misguided belief by most economists
policymakers and central banks that we
have transformed into a new world of
never-ending growth and prosperity this
was seen by robust and steady GDP growth
by law and control inflation by low
unemployment and control and low
financial volatility but the Great
Recession in 2007-2008 the Great Crash
broke this illusion a few hundred
billion dollars of losses in the
financial sector cascaded into five
trillion dollars of losses in war GDP
and almost 30 trillion dollar losses in
global stock market so the understanding
of this Great Recession was that this
was completely surprising this came out
of the blue this was like the wrath of
the God there was no responsibility so
as a reflection of this we started the
financial crisis observatory we have the
goal to diagnose in real time financial
bubbles and identify in advance their
critical time what is the underpinning
scientifically of this central
observatory we developed the theory
called Dragon Kings Dragon Kings
represent extreme events which are of a
class of their own they are special
they're outliers they are generated by
specific mechanism that may make them
predictable perhaps controllable
consider a financial price time-series
a given stock your preferred stock or
global index you have this up and downs
a very good measure of the risk of this
financial market either picks to valley
that represent a worst case scenario
when you bought at the top and sold at
the bottom you can look at the statistic
the frequency of the co-occurrence of
pig to valleys of different sizes which
is represented in this graph now
interestingly 99% of the pig - valets of
different amplitudes can be represented
by a universal parallel represented by
this red line here more interestingly
they are outliers there are exceptions
which are above this red line occur 100
times more frequently at least then the
extrapolation would predict them to
occur based on the calibration of the 99
percent remaining pig - valets they are
due to transient dependences such that a
loss is followed by loss which is
followed by a loss which is followed by
loss this kind of dependences are
largely missed by standard risk
management tools which ignored them and
see these are while they should see
Dragon Kings the root mechanism of a
Dragon King is a slow maturation towards
instability which is the bubble and the
climax of the bubble is often the crash
this is similar to the slow heating of
water in this test tube reaching the
boiling point where the instability of
the water occurs and you have the phase
transition to vapor and this process
which is absolutely nonlinear cannot be
predict by standard techniques is the
reflection of a collective emergent
behavior which is fundamentally
endogenous so the cause of the crash the
cause of the crisis has to be found in
instability of the system and any tiny
perturbation will make this instability
occur now some of you may have come to
your mind that is this not related to
the Black Swan concept you have heard
about frequently remember Black Swan is
this rare bird that you see once and
suddenly shattered you believe that all
swans should be white so it captured the
idea of unpredictability and no ability
that the extreme events are
fundamentally unknowable nothing can be
further from the Dragon King concept I
propose which is exactly the opposite
that most extreme events are actually
knowable and predictable so we can be
empowered and make take responsibility
and make prediction about them so let
have my Dragon King burn this Black Swan
concept there are many early warning
signals that are predicted by this
theory let me just focus on one of them
the super exponential grows with
positive feedback what does it mean
imagine you have an investment that
returns the first year 5% the second
year 10% a surger 20% the next year 40%
is that not marvelous this is a super
exponential growth our standard
exponential growth correspond to a
constant growth rate itself 10% the
point is that many times during bubbles
they are positive feedbacks which can be
of many times such that precious growth
and hands push forward increases the
next rows through this kind of super
exponential growth which is very
transient not sustainable and the key
idea is that the mathematical solution
of this class of neurons exhibit finite
time singularities which means that
there is a critical time where the
system will break will change regime it
may be a crash it may be just a plateau
something else and the key idea is at
the critical time the information about
critical term is contained in the early
development of this super expansion
growth
we have applied this theory early on
that was our first success to the
agnostic of the rupture of key elements
on the iron rocket using acoustic
emission you know this little noise that
you hear structure emitting to you when
they are stressed and revealed the
damage going on this is a collective
phenomenon of positive feedback the more
damage give the more damage so you can
actually predict within of course that
probability band when the rapture will
occur so this is no so successful that
it is used in the inducer phase of
codifying the flight perhaps more
surprisingly the same type of theory
applies to biology medicine parturition
the act of giving birth epileptic
seizures from 7 months of pregnancy a
mother start to feel episodic precursory
contraction of the uterus that are the
sign of these materials towards the
instability giving birth to the baby the
Dragon King so if you measure the
precursor signal you can actually
identify pre and post maturity problems
in advanced epileptic seizures also come
in a variety of size and when the brain
goes to a supercritical state you have
Dragon Kings which have a degree of
predictability and this can help the
patient to deal with this illness we
have applied this theory to many systems
landslides gaseous glacier collapse even
to the dynamics of prediction of success
blockbusters video YouTube videos movies
and so on but perhaps the most important
application is for finance and the
theory eliminates I believe there's deep
reason for the financial crisis that we
have gone through this is rooted in 30
years of history of babones
starting in 1980 with a global bubble
crashing in 1987 followed by many other
bubbles the biggest one was the new
economy internet bubble in 2000 crashing
2000 the
state bubbles in many countries
financial derivative bubbles everywhere
stock market bubbles also everywhere
commodity and oil bubbles depth and
credit bubbles bubbles bubbles bubbles
we had a global bubble this is a measure
of global overvaluation overall market
expressing what I call an illusion of a
perpetual money machine that suddenly
broke in 2007 the problem is that we see
the same process in particular through
quantitative easing of a sinking of a
purple manna machine nowadays to tackle
the crisis since 2008 in the US in
Europe in Japan this has very important
implication to understand the failure of
quantitative easing as well as austerity
measure as long as we don't attack the
core the structural cause of this
purpose of money machine thinking now
these are big claims why would you
believe me well perhaps because in last
15 years we have come out of our ivory
tower and start to publish ex ante and I
stress the term ex ante means in advance
before the crash confirm the existence
of the bubble of the financial excesses
these are a few of the major bubbles
that we have lived through in recent
history again many interesting stories
for each of them let me tell you just
one or two stories as suited with
massive bubbles we all know the Chinese
miracle this is the expression the stock
market of a massive bubble you know a
factor of 3 300% in just a few years in
September 2007 I was invited a keynote
speaker of macro hedge fund management
conference and I showed to the
conference a prediction that by the end
of 2007 this baboon would change regime
there might be a crash
certainly not sustainable now how do you
believe the very smart very motivated
very inform macro hedge fund managers
reacted to this prediction you know they
had made millions just surfing this
bubble until now they told me did yes
yeah the market might be overvalued but
you forget something there is a Beijing
Olympic Games coming in August 2008 and
it's very clear that the Chinese
government is controlling the economy
and is going what it takes to also avoid
any waves and control the stock market
three weeks after my presentation the
market was 20% and went through a phase
of volatility at Pivo and the total
market loss said 70% until the end of
the year so how can we be so
collectively wrong by misreading or
ignoring the science of the fact that
when an instability has developed and
the system is ripe any perturbation is
essentially impossible to control the
Chinese market collapse but he rebounded
in 2009 we also identified that this new
bubble smaller one was unsustainable so
we published again a prediction in
advance stating that by August 2009 the
market will correct will not continually
straight track our critics reading the
prediction said no it's not possible
the Chinese government is there they
have learned the lesson they will
control they want to benefit from the
growth perhaps these critics has not
learned the lesson previously so the
crisis did occur the market corrected
the same critics and said yes but you
publish your prediction you influence
the market it was not a prediction maybe
I am very powerful then now this is
interesting it shows that it's
essentially impossible until now to
develop a science of economics because
we are sentient beings who anticipate
is a problem of self-fulfilling
prophecies so we invented a new way of
doing science we created the financial
bubble experiment the ideas are
following we monitor the markets we
identify excesses bubbles we do our work
we write a report in which we put our
prediction of the critical time we don't
release the report it kept secret but
with modern encrypted encrypting
techniques we release we have a hash we
publish a public key and six months
later we release the report and there is
authentication and all this is done on
an international archive so that we
cannot be accused of just releasing the
successes let me teach you with a very
recent analysis 17 of May 2013 just two
weeks ago we identified that the US
stock market was an unsustainable path
and we release this on our website the
21st of May that it would be a channel
regime the next day the market start to
change regime course this is not a crash
this is just the sort of force act of a
massive bubble in the making scaling up
the discussion at the size of the planet
we see the same thing whenever we look
at in observable in the biosphere in the
atmosphere in the ocean showing this X
super exponential trajectories
characterizing an unsustainable path and
announcing a phase transition this
diagram on the right shows a very
beautiful compilation of studies
suggesting indeed that there is a
nonlinear possibility for nonlinear
transition just in the next few decades
so there are bubbles everywhere from one
side this is exciting for me as a
professor who chase bubbles and slays
dragons has a major Haskell sometime
called me but can we release slay the
Dragons very recently with collaborators
we studied a dynamical system where you
see the Dragon King as these big loops
and we were able to apply tiny
perturbation at right times that remove
when control is on these dragons
governor say pravara governing if the
art of planning and predicting but is he
not the case that is probably one of the
biggest gap of mankind which has the
responsibility to steer our societies
and our planet toward sustainability in
the face of growing challenges and
crises but the Dragon King theory gives
hope we learn that most systems have
pockets of predictability it's possible
to develop advanced diagnosis of crisis
so that we can be prepared we can take
measures we can take responsibility and
so that never again extremes and crises
like the Great Recession or the European
crisis take us by surprise
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]